[Music]
take a look outside a window what is the
season where you are how do you know
most likely he looked at a tree or plant
and noticed details about its leaves and
assess the qualities of sunlight
streaming outside observing the timing
of biological events in relation to
changes in seasonal climate is called
phenology when you notice that daffodil
buds are poking through the snow and
think spring is on its way you're using
phenology when you see leaves turn from
green to red and watch migrating birds
fly past and realize that summer is over
autumn is here you're using phenology
literally meaning the science of
appearance phenology comes from the
Greek words fino to show or appear and
logos to study humans have relied on
phenology since the time of hunters and
gatherers we've watched changes in
seasons to know when to plant and
harvest food and when to track migrating
animals scientists observe and document
seasonal changes in nature and look for
patterns in the timing of seasonal
events timing of these natural signs has
remained consistent until recently
increasing global temperature is causing
rhythms of nature to shift budburst the
day when a tree or plants leaf a flower
buds open is occurring earlier in the
year for some species for every one
degree Celsius rise in temperature but
burst happens five days earlier than
usual differences in timing affect not
only plants but the insects and birds
that depend on the plants for food for
example oak trees in the Arnhem forest
of the Netherlands now experience
budburst ten days earlier as compared to
20 years ago new oak leaves are favorite
food of winter moth caterpillars to
survive the caterpillars adapted to the
change in the trees timing and now hatch
15 days earlier than before
migrating Pied flycatcher birds however
aren't doing as well the birds referred
to feed their chicks winter moth
caterpillars the caterpillars are now
hatching earlier but the birds chicks or
not this delay is costing the birds a
food source
the pied flycatcher population has
decreased by up to 90% in some areas as
a result changes to a seemingly simple
event leaves opening has ripple effects
throughout a food web earlier bloom
times can also have an economic impact
the famed cherry blossoms in Washington
DC are blooming five days earlier than
before since the cherry trees are
blooming earlier the blossoms also fade
earlier frustrating thousands of
tourists who visit for the Cherry
Blossom Festival high school marching
bands playing all year to attend the
parade and perform surrounded by
majestic white canopy how disappointing
for them to find well trees rather than
the famous cherry blossoms plants and
animals react to changes in natural
light and temperature increasing
temperatures cause plants to bloom
earlier than before and become out of
sync with the insects and birds in a
food web so the next time you look out
your window and notice what season it is
you may be fooled by those blooming
trees think of phenology then think of
how you can play a part to slow climate
change
you